first draft of pack direct podman call rfc (#288)
buildpacks/rfcs: text/0000-pack-direct-podman-call.md

# Meta
[meta]: #meta
- Name: Pack direct podman call
- Start Date: 2023-06-16
- Author(s): dvaumoron
- Status: Draft
- RFC Pull Request: (leave blank)
- CNB Pull Request: (leave blank)
- CNB Issue: (leave blank)
- Supersedes: "N/A"

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

A flag `--daemonless` will be added to the `pack` CLI, the flag presence will switch from the current functioning to one where podman is called directly (without needing a daemon backed socket)

# Definitions
[definitions]: #definitions

Container Manager Client API: an API such as Docker's `CommonAPIClient` or Podman's `ContainerEngine` allowing interaction with container and OCI image

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

> `pack` currently requires a container manager client API available via a socket.  Both `docker` and `podman` are compatible with the [socket API](https://docs.docker.com/engine/api/v1.24/).  This RFC proposes that `pack` is extended to support a "daemonless" mode.  In a "daemonless" mode `pack` will directly use a container manager client API.  This avoids running a `docker` or `podman` daemon and avoids opening up a local socket.  This will allow to use pack as a full-userspace, standalone application on the OS supported by podman (currently Linux, as Windows and macOS need podman machine).

Reviewer: `pack` uses the docker daemon both to spin up containers in which the lifecycle executes, as well as an export target in which to store application images. Does this RFC support both use cases? I assume so, but thought it best to clarify.

Author: It depend of what kind of export we are talking about, if you mean export to a registry, pack use the github.com/google/go-containerregistry library to do it, and do not depend on Docker for that.

If you talk about local storage, pack call the Docker socket via the DockerClient interface, changing this implementation will change the place where image will be stored, however i don't think this is a problem.

Users using the new flag to avoid installing Docker will have podman if they need to run locally containers (without having to use the podman compatibility socket), or no tools at all because pack will be usable as a standalone.

User with several tool including Docker, would be able to use them to "send" images to Docker if they prefer to use the flag (podman or buildah (which use the same image storage)  allow to do that).

User with only Docker have no reason to use the flag, if they use it and want to run the generated images locally without installing more tools, they will need to export them to a registry and retrieve them from it. Maybe adding a warning when the flag is used will avoid this kind of mistake.

# Meta
[meta]: #meta
- Name: Pack direct podman call
- Start Date: 2023-06-16
- Author(s): dvaumoron
- Status: Draft
- RFC Pull Request: (leave blank)
- CNB Pull Request: (leave blank)
- CNB Issue: (leave blank)
- Supersedes: "N/A"

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

A flag `--daemonless` will be added to the `pack` CLI, the flag presence will switch from the current functioning to one where podman is called directly (without needing a daemon backed socket)

# Definitions
[definitions]: #definitions

Container Manager Client API: an API such as Docker's `CommonAPIClient` or Podman's `ContainerEngine` allowing interaction with container and OCI image

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

> `pack` currently requires a container manager client API available via a socket.  Both `docker` and `podman` are compatible with the [socket API](https://docs.docker.com/engine/api/v1.24/).  This RFC proposes that `pack` is extended to support a "daemonless" mode.  In a "daemonless" mode `pack` will directly use a container manager client API.  This avoids running a `docker` or `podman` daemon and avoids opening up a local socket.  This will allow to use pack as a full-userspace, standalone application on the OS supported by podman (currently Linux, as Windows and macOS need podman machine).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`pack` currently interacts with `podman` through API service.  Both `docker` and `podman` can run the service, which provides compatible [socket API](https://docs.docker.com/engine/api/v1.24/).  This RFC proposes alternative "daemonless" mode with direct calls to `podman` without opening up a local socket or running API service. This makes `pack` userspace, standalone application (currently Linux, as Windows and macOS need `podman` machine).
```

# Meta
[meta]: #meta
- Name: Pack direct podman call
- Start Date: 2023-06-16
- Author(s): dvaumoron
- Status: Draft
- RFC Pull Request: (leave blank)
- CNB Pull Request: (leave blank)
- CNB Issue: (leave blank)
- Supersedes: "N/A"

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

> A flag `--container-engine` will be added to the `pack` CLI, the allowed flag value will be `docker` (the current functioning) and `podman` to call podman directly (without socket call)

Reviewer 3: Can we add a little motivation on why we want to avoid the socket call?

Author: This is a way to make pack standalone, developer would be able to use pack without docker or podman, however they will still need a tool like skopeo to move OCI images.

Reviewer 2: > Can we add a little motivation on why we want to avoid the socket call?

`podman` doesn't react the socket by default and it needs to be started by calling `systemd` manually. https://github.com/containers/podman/blob/main/docs/tutorials/socket_activation.md

Probably the socket concern is the security. I don't know if another process can interfere with existing socket communication, but if it can call podman, I guess there is no difference in security.

Author: docker act as root, podman doesn't need that, so you can use it on a computer without root access (like a company one), in that case why bother to launch a socket in user space ? Moreover as i have already said, using podman as a library, we can make the pack utility standalone, that could be usefull for some case where you don't run container locally, because you will not need docker or podman at all.

# Definitions
[definitions]: #definitions

> N/A

Reviewer 3: The underlying container runtime is `containerd` or `runc` or similar.  I think here we're discussing an alterative to the Docker-API-via-socket with the Podman API.  Is "Orchestration Client API" a good collective term for these?  Is there a more commonly used term?

```suggestion
Orchestration Client API: an API such as Docker's `DockerClient` or Podman's `Runtime` that 
```

Author: I am not sure that  "Orchestration Client API" would be a good choice, "Container Orchestration" refer to tools like Kubernetes or Docker Swarm

Author: Maybe "Container Manager API" to distinguish from "Container Runtime API" which are lower level API

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

> This will allow to use pack as a standalone on the OS supported by podman (currently Linux, as Windows and macOS need podman machine), making possible to use pack without installing docker or podman (a tool like skopeo will still be necessary to send image in registries)

Reviewer 3: Can we expand on the motivation to explain what the difference is between the proposed mode of operation and the existing mode of operation?

```suggestion
`pack` currently requires an orchestration client API available via a socket.  Both `docker` and `podman` are compatible with the [socket API](https://docs.docker.com/engine/api/v1.24/).  This RFC proposes that `pack` is extended to support a "daemonless" mode.  In a "daemonless" mode `pack` will directly use an orchestration client API.  This avoids running a `docker` or `podman` daemon and avoids opening up a local socket.  This will allow to use pack as a full-userspace, standalone application on the OS supported by podman (currently Linux, as Windows and macOS need podman machine).
```

# What it is
[what-it-is]: #what-it-is

> Adding `--container-engine podman` to the `pack` command which currently need docker call would allow them to work without docker installed.

Reviewer 3: I wonder if `--daemonless` is a better flag name?  Does this imply `--publish` which publishes directly to an OCI registry, rather than using the local daemon for storage.

Author: I think a `--daemonless` flag without argument is a better solution, this mode could be used without `--publish` as podman store OCI images in user space (generally in `$HOME/. local/share/containers/storage/`), it depends on the will of the user to run image locally

# How it Works
[how-it-works]: #how-it-works

> 

Reviewer 3: Do we need to expand on this section?  I'd like a 

1. high-level overview of how-it-works
2. details on the adapter interface
3. discussion on how layers are cached
4. discussion on where the output image ends up

I expect that we're proposing here to use an OCI registry for the layer cache and for output images.  But I think we need to make all this explict to RFC readers.

Author: In order to store locally OCI images with the new mode, change in the lifecycle tool will be needed too

Author: I have added a short code sample to show how an adapter could be done to answer 2

Author: I have digged deeper into the caching part of pack and lifecycle, it don't seem needed to modify those part (volume caching store in local host by mounting it in the container using the interface DockerClient, image caching use registries (licefycle use github.com/google/go-containerregistry via imgutil))

Reviewer: > In order to store locally OCI images with the new mode, change in the lifecycle tool will be needed too

Could you talk about what these changes would look like?

Reviewer: I'd love to know more about @AidanDelaney's points 1-4. Not being super familiar with podman myself, a little background information would be helpful.

Author: > > In order to store locally OCI images with the new mode, change in the lifecycle tool will be needed too
> 
> Could you talk about what these changes would look like?

As stated in the following comment, after a deeper check, that part doesn't need change, it relies on the DockerClient interface or an independent library no tied to the Docker socket

Author: > I'd love to know more about @AidanDelaney's points 1-4. Not being super familiar with podman myself, a little background information would be helpful.

1 & 2 have been detailed in the RFC document
3 layer are cached with a "VolumeCache" mecanism, which rely on the DockerClient interface
4 podman store local image in user space (/home/dvaumoron/.local/share/containers on my computer), and docker store them in common space using root right (/var/lib/containers/storage on my computer)

Reviewer: > it relies on the DockerClient interface or an independent library no tied to the Docker socket

Here's where we initialize the docker client in the lifecycle: https://github.com/buildpacks/lifecycle/blob/367b451eb708dff1aa6e5ba179e1c88c4b9917e2/priv/docker.go#L16

I'm assuming `shouldConnectSock` will be false in a daemonless scenario as pack will not mount the socket. But don't we need to specify other options to enable the podman wrapper? Or are you expecting to use the lifecycle in "OCI layout mode" and handle the processing in pack?

Author: After some more check, depending on which lifecycle command is launched the fallback when the flag use daemon is false, will be the layout version or the remote version, so the options passed to lifecycle should be adapted to ensure correctness.

Author: I added precisions in the RFC corresponding to my previous comment

> The flag will change the initialization of the CommonAPIClient passed to call docker (interface defined in "github.com/docker/docker/client") by an adapter to call podman as a library. 

Reviewer 3: Could we sketch out how the adapter would work?

Author: the goal is a to transmit/translate call to an initialized Runtime https://github.com/containers/podman/blob/v4.5.1/libpod/runtime.go#L63

Author: I can limit the adapter to the sub interface DockerClient https://github.com/buildpacks/pack/blob/v0.29.0/pkg/client/docker.go#L14, because the other method of the CommonAPIClient are not used within pack

# Migration
[migration]: #migration

> N/A

Reviewer 3: Do we need migration documentation?

```suggestion
The current mode of `pack` operation is the default mode of operation.  The proposed `--daemonless` mode of operation is an optional mode of execution.  We will need to document how to switch between operation modes and the motivations for choosing an appropriate mode of operation.
```

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

> pack contributor could need to update the podman dependencies in go.mod for bugfixes

Reviewer 3: Does the `podman` API support running `arm64` containers on `amd64`?  If not, then one drawback is that this proposed RFC will not benefit from changes in our multi-architecture RFC.

Author: This seems to be ok : https://github.com/containers/podman/discussions/15741
podman use the --arch flag which is transmited to the interface ContainerEngine as an option (i changed the how it works part to change Runtime by ContainerEngine (the Runtime struct is called by one of the ContainerEngine implementation))
